The Doreen Principle A Biblical Response to the Commercialization
of Christianity by Connoly Owens Chapter 5 The Paragative of Servinhood
Freedom vs. Duty
During my senior year in high school, my parents went away on a week-long trip.
They hired a babysitter, we'll call her Anne, from my eight-year-old sister.
The truth be told, my sophomore brother and I probably needed one as well.
Anne came highly recommended, so my parents paid her generously and left her well-supplied
with additional cash in case of emergencies.
However, Anne was far from responsible.
She took all the extra money and purchased junk food, primarily jelly beans.
Yes, jelly beans.
You can imagine how many jelly beans a decent supply of emergency cash would buy.
Upon her initial transgression, she gave my brother and me permission to go out at intervals
and hours beyond the guidelines my parents had set.
While I was not always the best behaved teenager, my nefarious use of this freedom only extended
to joining some study groups I wouldn't otherwise have joined.
If you want to know how my brother took advantage of the opportunity, you'll have to ask him.
When my parents returned, they were less than thrilled and did not receive additional employment
in the Ovens household.
Did Anne have a right to do it as she did?
In a sense, yes.
When my parents hired her, they essentially gave her permission to perform all the tasks
of a caretaker in their absence.
This includes spending money allotted for food or deciding how to keep the kids in line.
That being said, my parents expected Anne to use this authority in line with their priorities
rather than with her own.
In his epistles, Paul frequently speaks of his right to financial support.
However, he speaks of this right in the context of his servanthood.
Just as parents grant a babysitter jurisdiction over a home to uphold their priorities, a servant
wields a delegated authority in order to accomplish his master's priorities.
In chapter 3, we examine the triangle of obligation in 1 Corinthians 9-7-14, skipping
verse 12.
In this chapter, I would like us to return to that verse in order to explore how servanthood
shapes Paul's use of his authority, his apostolic prerogative.
In other words, we'll continue our consideration of servanthood in 1 Corinthians 9-15-22,
picking up or we left off.
The right of servanthood.
Paul's most intense defense of his refusal to accept payment appears in 1 Corinthians 9.
He presents his decision in the context of Christian liberty, 1 Corinthians 9-19, and his
right to receive support.
If others share this rightful claim on you, do not we even more?
Nevertheless, we have not made use of this right, but we endure anything rather than put
an obstacle in the way of the gospel of Christ, 1 Corinthians 9-12.
This has led some interpreters to decide that Paul arbitrates his policy as a matter of
personal choice.
In other words, it appears as though he has a permissive license to accept payment and
return for his preaching.
But for noble reasons, rejects it.
At least two considerations should lead us to dismiss this claim.
First, to say that Paul goes beyond what is required of him is to identify a good course
and a better course, and to declare that both are sufficiently pleasing to God.
This idea is known as super-errogation, and runs contrary to the teaching of the Bible.
The Lord does not require a minimum bar, but perfection, Matthew 5.48.
While God may require different things of different people given their strengths and circumstances,
each person must serve the Lord as best as he is able.
Moreover, Jesus summarily dismisses this notion of super-errogation when he points out that
no servant of God will be able to say he has done more than was required.
So you also, when you have done all that you were commanded, say, "We are unworthy servants.
We have only done what was our duty."
Luke 1710.
If one cannot do more than their duty, we could rule out the idea that it would be acceptable
for Paul to accept payment, but better for him to reject it.
Second, the surrounding context indicates that Paul could still be held guilty for improperly
taking support, even if he has a right to that support.
Paul's mention of his financial policy in 1 Corinthians 9 does not stand on its own,
but serves as an illustration to correct the Corinthians' disposition toward idolatry
addressed more directly in chapters 8 and 10.
In these chapters, the Apostle acknowledges the Corinthians' right, 1 Corinthians 8
9, to food, but instructs them to flee idolatry, 1 Corinthians 10 4.
It ceased to eat food sacrifice to idols.
To paraphrase, he describes their actions as lawful but not helpful, 1 Corinthians 10
23, meaning that though they have a right to eat, they abuse that right by eating food
sacrifice to idols, committing idolatry.
Notice that elsewhere, Paul uses the same distinction between lawful and helpful to describe
sexual immorality, 1 Corinthians 6, 12, through 15.
Christians have a right to use their bodies for sex, but they abuse that right if they sleep
with a prostitute.
In other words, when Paul uses the word right, he does not indicate a permissive license or
a legal carte blanche that justifies any course of action.
Rather, he denotes an authority of servanhood that grants the actor freedom to serve the
Lord as the Lord requires.
In other words, he speaks of a stewardship.
A steward has authority over an estate to do as he determines, but incurs moral guilt
when this authority is abused to act contrary to the will of the owner.
Remember Anne the babysitter?
She had the right to spend the emergency fund as she chose, but was still guilty when she
chose poorly.
To further illustrate, Adam had steward ship over the whole Garden of Eden, including the
tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, but this authority did not permit him to eat of
that tree without penalty.
Genesis 2, 15-17.
Likewise, the Corinthians have steward ship over their own bodies to eat food, but would
abuse that steward ship by eating food offered to demons, 1 Corinthians 10, 20-21.
As a servant of God, Paul has steward ship over his converts to receive money from them,
but would abuse that steward ship by receiving payment for a gospel that is not his decel.
With these considerations in mind, we must conclude that Paul's financial policy does
not merely represent his own preferences, a personal quirk, but an absolute ethical
code. His pattern establishes a prescription that binds all who minister in the name of Christ.
The boast of Servanthood.
In 1 Corinthians 9-15-19, Paul lists several reasons for rejecting Corinthian funds, beginning
with his desire to maintain grounds for boasting.
But I have made no use of any of these rights, nor am I writing these things to secure any
such provision, for I would rather die than have anyone deprive me of my ground for boasting,
1 Corinthians 9-15.
Of course, boasting in himself would contradict the message of Paul's epistle, 1 Corinthians
129-321-47.
As he writes, "Let the one who boasts boasts in the Lord, 1 Corinthians 131, CF 1531."
With Paul's boasting rests in the Lord independent of himself, then it resides there, unthreatened,
secure in an unchanging God.
Yet all the same, he declares that an acceptance of money would jeopardize his boasting.
A fact he confirms in 2 Corinthians 11-7-10.
In this same context, he repeats the aphorism to boast in the Lord, explaining that he boasts
in the ministry God has assigned to him, 2 Corinthians 10-13-17.
In other words, his boasts in the Lord is not independent of himself.
It has some relation to his ministry.
Thus, an alteration to his fundraising practices potentially alters his boasts.
If Paul receives direct payments from the Corinthians in exchange for his ministry,
he receives honor over God as the source of the gospel.
This would make his own work his grounds for boasting rather than the Lord's work.
If instead he rejects payment and return for the gospel, the apostle acknowledges that
its source lies outside of himself.
Respiracy compromises Paul's earnest boasts in the Lord by placing his boasts in himself.
The obligation of servitude.
Paul additionally explains that he does not accept funding from the Corinthians because
he is bound to minister to them.
For if I preach the gospel, that gives me no ground for boasting, for necessity is laid
upon me.
Woe to me if I do not preach the gospel.
First Corinthians 9-16.
Paul is a steward of the mysteries of God and a servant of Christ.
As of his status as a servant steward, he receives no special accolades for preaching the
gospel.
However, if he operates as an independent agent, doing his own will rather than the will
of God, it would make sense that he receives every word, direct payment from others.
In the same way, it is improper for a royal soldier to accept money from the citizens
he protects.
He has first Corinthians 9-7.
His commission from the king delegitimizes all other compensatory transactions.
If he demands funding from the common man, as though their taxes are owed to him rather
than the throne, he may be found guilty of extortion.
Even if he only accepts voluntary offerings of support, he engages in bribery.
Ultimately, the soldier who accepts any form of direct payment from the citizens ceases
to operate on behalf of the king as one who is obligated, but begins acting in his own
interest as one who does his work freely.
Similarly, if Paul were to accept money from the Corinthians as direct, i.e.
unmediated, payment for his ministry there, he would invalidate his status as a servant
of Christ.
As one commissioned by God, Paul cannot rightly accept third-party compensation and direct
exchange for his ministry, cf.
2 Corinthians 217.
Such reciprocity denotes an insincere stewardship.
However, through the Dory Imprinciple, he may accept funds that are not designated to
displace his true employer.
Co-labor and no way invalidates Paul's status as a servant.
Rather, we should anticipate that servants of the same master assist each other, pulling
their resources as would be profitable and service of their mutual lord.
The reward of Servant Hood.
And the next two verses, Paul explains that he conducts his ministry as he does in order
to receive a reward.
For if I do this of my own will, I have a reward.
But if not of my own will, I am still entrusted with a stewardship.
But then is my reward.
That in my preaching, I may present the gospel free of charge, so as not to make full use
of my right in the gospel.
1 Corinthians 9 17 through 18.
Surprisingly, Paul's activity and reward are identical.
To preach the gospel free of charge.
The idea is not that the apostle by refusing money accrues merit with which he will receive
a reward.
Instead, by refusing money, he enjoys the reward itself.
The stewardship he executes.
Christ working through him.
Given the preceding context of boasting, 1 Corinthians 9 15 through 16, we should not distinguish
Paul's boasting from his reward.
And the words of one commentator, they refer to the same reality.
In either the framework of boasting or that of reward, Paul stands to gain from preaching
free of charge because then Christ may be seen working through him.
In contrast, if Paul were to receive payment, his reward would be the payment itself.
He would operate as a voluntary laborer, setting his own fees so he would no longer function
as a servant bound by his master.
The F. John 718.
Accepting financial reward would forfeit the greater reward, godly stewardship.
This recalls the teaching of Christ and the servant on the mount.
Thus, when you give to the needy, sound no trumpet before you as the hypocrites do in the
synagogues and in the streets that they may be praised by others.
Truly I say to you, they have received the reward.
And when you fast, do not look gloomy like the hypocrites, for they disfigure their faces
that their fasting may be seen by others.
Truly I say to you, they have received the reward.
Matthew 6 to 16.
Using this construct, we may paraphrase Paul.
When you minister, do not be like the hypocrites who do so for payment.
Truly I say to you, they have received the reward.
Thus the term hypocrit seems to charge for the context of 1 Corinthians 9.
But is not this precisely what he communicates?
The one who receives reciprocity does not operate as a sincere servant of Christ, but as
a free agent after his own reward.
On the other hand, the one who receives co-labor enjoys financial benefits within the auspices
of stewardship, a greater reward than mere money.
The scope of servanthood.
And perhaps the most defining passage in 1 Corinthians 9, Paul proclaims that he has
become all things to all people.
For though I am free from all, I have made myself a servant to all, that I might win more
of them.
To the Jews I became as a Jew in order to win Jews.
To those under the law I became as one under the law, though not being myself under the
law, that I might win those under the law.
To those outside the law I became as one outside the law, not being outside the law of God,
but under the law of Christ.
That I might win those outside the law.
To the weak I became weak, that I might win the weak.
I have become all things to all people, that by all means I might save some.
1 Corinthians 9 19-22 Paul does not speak of making the gospel
more attractive.
He has already admitted that the gospel itself is a stumbling block, on appealing to the world.
1 Corinthians 1-23.
And that he has a shoot, typical means of attraction and persuasion.
1 Corinthians 2-1-5.
Furthermore, rather than stirring up good will through offering the gospel free of charge,
we learn in 2 Corinthians that Paul only stirred up tension as those with more financially
glorious ministries turned the people away to different teaching 2 Corinthians 11-7.
Between a free gospel and one offered at a price, the Corinthians, who so valued wealth
and status in their leaders, found a ladder more enticing.
While many have read 1 Corinthians 9 to speak of Paul's contextualizing of the gospel,
something more specific is at play.
Each of these phrases of accommodation represents some act of humility.
Though already a Jew, the Apostle voluntarily became a Jew under the judgment of the law
by receiving 39 lashes, 2 Corinthians 11-24.
He became as one without the law, renouncing all of his own merit based on law keeping.
Galatians 4-12.
He became weak by enduring the hardships and humiliations of ministry, 2 Corinthians 12-9.
These accommodations impress no one yet are necessary for the gospel to go forward.
The key to all of this may be found in verse 19.
Paul does not imitate all, but rather humbles himself in order to serve all.
As a servant of Christ, Paul must also be a servant to those to whom he is sent 2 Corinthians
4-5, C.F. 124.
He does not generally act like a Jew for Jews, or a Gentile for Gentiles, or a weak person
for the weak, but he is a servant to all in every circumstance by humbling himself so
that the truth of the gospel may be properly acknowledged.
We should not be misguided by the Apostle's clever rhetorical device, so as to imagine
that he would become popular for the popular, strong for the strong, or rich for the rich.
The same applies to Paul's rejection of money.
First-century Corinth bustles with economic prosperity, and certainly some of the wealthy
filled the ranks in the church.
C.F. 1 Corinthians 4-8.
So Paul does not reject financial support out of a desire to blend in.
He does not make himself attractive to the people of Corinth.
As we have seen, accepting their money would have made him more attractive.
Rather, he humbles himself so that he might fulfill the role of a servant.
Here sincerity and rejection of reciprocity go hand in hand.
If Paul were to accept payment from the Corinthians, he would not be their servant, but a service provider,
and they his clients.
Whether or not he requests money, his ministry would be understood to impose an obligation
that requires a settling of accounts.
However, the apostle may freely accept material support from co-laborers without compromising
his position.
Conclusion
The duty of Servanthood demands the Dory Imprinciple.
As a servant, Paul must reject ministerial reciprocity, and he must accept ministerial
co-labor.
And the next chapter we will look at Paul's motivations through an additional lens, his sincerity.
End of chapter 5